Adds SPIRE with Envoy and OPA tutorial (#20)
spiffe/spire-tutorials: k8s/envoy-opa/README.md

# Part 1: Deploy Updated and New Resources

Assuming the SPIRE Envoy X.509 Tutorial as a starting point, there are some resources that need to be updated and others must be created.
The goal is to have the requests authorized by OPA before hitting the `backend` service. There is an mTLS connection already established between Envoy instances so the missing part is to add an OPA Agent to authorize requests based on policies.

## Update Backend Deployment

In order to let OPA authorize or reject requests coming to the `backend` service, it is necessary to add it as a sidecar to the deployment.
The new container is added and configured as follows: 

```console
   - name: opa
      image: openpolicyagent/opa:latest-istio
      imagePullPolicy: Always
      ports:
         - name: opa-envoy
         containerPort: 8182
         protocol: TCP
         - name: opa-api-port
         containerPort: 8181
         protocol: TCP
      args:
         - "run"
         - "--server"
         - "--config-file=/run/opa/opa-config.yaml"
         - "/run/opa/opa-policy.rego"
      volumeMounts:
         - name: backend-opa-policy
         mountPath: /run/opa
         readOnly: true
```

> One thing to note is the use of the `openpolicyagent/opa:latest-istio` image. This image is created by retagging the latest released image of OPA-Istio which extends OPA with a gRPC server that implements the Envoy External Authorization API.

Reviewer: Actually, we could use this text from later in the document. I mean the part I added in parentheses. You may want to reword it.

-----
One thing to note is the use of the `openpolicyagent/opa:latest-istio` image. This image is created by retagging the latest released image of OPA-Istio which extends OPA with a gRPC server that implements the Envoy External Authorization API (this API enforces security policies received by Envoy).

The following expression defines that the HTTP Method of the request must be equal to `GET`

```console
   http_request.method == "GET"
```

And the last expression corresponds also to a user-defined function.

```console
   svc_spiffe_id == "spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend"
```

The function `svc_spiffe_id` extracts the SPIFFE ID of the service from the `x-forwarded-client-cert` (XFCC) header present on the request. It leverages two Envoy configurations that will take care of setting the header:

```console
   forward_client_cert_details: sanitize_set
   set_current_client_cert_details:
      uri: true
```

When client connection is mTLS, like this scenario, `forward_client_cert_details: sanitize_set` resets the XFCC header with the client certificate information and `set_current_client_cert_details` specifies the fields in the client certificate to be forwarded.

> It worth noting that the XFCC header value is a comma (“,”) separated string. Each substring is an XFCC element and each XFCC element is a semicolon “;” separated string. Each substring is a key-value pair, grouped together by an equals (“=”) sign. The following keys are supported by Envoy:

Reviewer: Sorry, but could you add the () around the ";" to make it consistent. I can see it would be easy to overlook that suggestion.

   - `By`        The Subject Alternative Name (URI type) of the current proxy’s certificate.
   - `Hash`      The SHA 256 digest of the current client certificate.
   - `Cert`      The entire client certificate in URL encoded PEM format.
   - `Subject`   The Subject field of the current client certificate. The value is always double-quoted.
   - `URI`       The URI type Subject Alternative Name field of the current client certificate.
   - `DNS`       The DNS type Subject Alternative Name field of the current client certificate. A client certificate may contain multiple DNS type Subject Alternative Names, each will be a separate key-value pair.

> 

Reviewer: I see that the sample is long so users have to scroll horizontally. Let's add a newline in the middle and notify users like this:
-----
The following is a sample XFCC header value split into two lines for readability:

By=spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/backend;Hash=a9317919875e178ce6d61eaa023490
a2091299753ca5cd01d5323e40696d690b;URI=spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend

With these details about the XFCC header in mind and knowing that a X.509 SVID MUST contain exactly one URI SAN and that the SPIFFE ID is set as a URI type in the Subject Alternative Name extension, then it is possible to extract the SPIFFE ID from the XFCC header set by Envoy using the function:

```console
   svc_spiffe_id = spiffe_id {
      [_, _, uri_type_san] := split(http_request.headers["x-forwarded-client-cert"], ";")
      [_, spiffe_id] := split(uri_type_san, "=")
   }
```

Consequently, the policy will evaluate to true only when the request is sent to a valid resource (/balances/, /profiles/ or /transactions/) with a `GET` method and it comes from a workload authenticated with the SPIFFE ID equal to `spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend`. In all other cases, the request is not authorized by OPA and then rejected by Envoy.

## Add an External Authorization Filter

Finally, this setup requires an External Authorization Filter in the Envoy configuration that connects to the OPA instance. This new HTTP Filter is used with OPA as an authorization service to enforce security policies over API requests received by Envoy. 

> This is accomplish by adding a new HTTP filter:

Reviewer: My wording isn't quite right. Please update.

Also, what do you mean by "*new* filter"? Is it newly available to people or do you mean it's a new thing to configure?

```
Finally, this setup requires an External Authorization Filter that connects to the OPA instance. This new HTTP Filter is used with OPA as an authorization service to enforce security policies over API requests received by Envoy. This is accomplished by adding a new HTTP filter in `envoy.yaml` 
```

> This is accomplish by adding a new HTTP filter:

Author: The configuration already contains a section for `http_filters` where the only filter configured is `envoy.router`. Now, as part of the update for this new scenario, we add a new filter to the same section, in this case, the filter is: `envoy.ext_authz`

```console
   $ kubectl get services

   NAME            TYPE           CLUSTER-IP    EXTERNAL-IP      PORT(S)          AGE
   backend-envoy   ClusterIP      None          <none>           9001/TCP         6m53s
   frontend        LoadBalancer   10.8.14.117   35.222.164.221   3000:32586/TCP   6m52s
   frontend-2      LoadBalancer   10.8.7.57     35.222.190.182   3002:32056/TCP   6m53s
   kubernetes      ClusterIP      10.8.0.1      <none>           443/TCP          59m
```

The `frontend` service will be available at the `EXTERNAL-IP` value and port `3000`, which was configured for our container. In the sample output shown above, the URL to navigate is `http://35.222.164.221:3000`. Open your browser and navigate to the IP address shown for `frontend` in your environment, adding the port `:3000`. Once the page is loaded, you'll see the account details for user _Jacob Marley_. 

![Frontend][frontend-view]

[frontend-view]: images/frontend_view.png "Frontend view"

> Let's take a look at the OPA Agent logs to see what is happening behind the scenes. Use the following Bash script to get the logs for the OPA instance running next to the `backend` service on a pretty print format: 

Reviewer: Hmm, the world is a big place. I'm not sure it's safe to assume all people who run this demo will have jq installed. I kind of do think jq should be listed as a requirement. But if you disagree, at least let's make jq link to its web page: https://stedolan.github.io/jq/ . (We do assume users have git installed and don't mention it...) It's ok if it can't be both monospace and a link.

> Let's take a look at the OPA Agent logs to see what is happening behind the scenes. Use the following Bash script to get the logs for the OPA instance running next to the `backend` service on a pretty print format: 

Author: Ok, sounds good to me. I'll add the link to the reference.
Thanks.

## Testing Invalid Requests

On the other hand, following the same steps we can confirm that a request that does not satisfy the policy prevent the associated data from being displayed. In this case the `frontend-2` service is not able to talk to the `backend` service because its SPIFFE ID does not satisfy the policy at the OPA Agent.
As a result, when you connect to the URL for the `frontend-2` service (e.g. `http://35.222.190.182:3002`), the browser only displays the title without any account details.

![Frontend-2-no-details][frontend-2-view-no-details]

[frontend-2-view-no-details]: images/frontend-2_view_no_details.png "Frontend-2 view no details account"

The reader can verify the decision made by OPA using the same script `scripts/backend-opa-logs.sh` as performed in the previous section. A similar log entry is available for the `frontend-2` service but with result equal to `false` due to the SPIFFE ID mismatch.

## Retesting frontend-2 with a New Policy

> Let's update the rego policy to match the SPIFFE ID of the `frontend-2` and test again. There is a Bash script that we can leverage to complete this task. Once executed, it will open the editor defined by your `KUBE_EDITOR`, or `EDITOR` environment variables, or fall back to 'vi' for Linux or 'notepad' for Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's update the Rego policy to match the SPIFFE ID of the `frontend-2` and test again. There is a Bash script that we can leverage to complete this task. Once executed, it will open the editor defined by your `KUBE_EDITOR`, or `EDITOR` environment variables, or fall back to `vi` for Linux or Notepad for Windows.
```

```console
   $ bash scripts/backend-update-policy.sh
```

With the editor open, look for the following line that specifies the SPIFFE ID:

```console
   svc_spiffe_id == "spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend"
```

> And update it to match the SPIFFE ID for the `frontend-2` workload:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update that line to match the SPIFFE ID for the `frontend-2` workload:
```

```console
   svc_spiffe_id == "spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend-2"
```

> Save the changes and exit. The new version of the configmap will be applied and the `backend` pod will be restarted to pickup the new rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Save the changes and exit. The `backend-update-policy.sh` script resumes. The script applies the new version of the ConfigMap and the restarts the `backend` pod to pick up the new rule.
```

Wait some seconds for the deployment to propagate before trying to view the `frontend-2` service in your browser again.
Once the pod is ready, refresh the browser using the correct URL for the `frontend-2` service (e.g. `http://35.222.190.182:3002`). As a result, now the page shows the account details for user _Alex Fergus_.

![Frontend-2][frontend-2-view]

[frontend-2-view]: images/frontend-2_view.png "Frontend-2 view"

On the other hand, if you now connect to the URL for the `frontend` service (e.g. `http://35.222.164.221:3000`), the browser only displays the title without any account details. This is expected because the policy was updated and now the SPIFFE ID for the `frontend` service does not satisfy the policy anymore.

# Cleanup

> When you are finished running this tutorial, you can use the following commands to remove all the resources used for configuring Envoy with OPA to authorized requests.
> 
> Run the following command to clean the environment created for the tutorial. It will remove:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are finished, you can use the following commands to clean the environment created for the tutorial. It will remove:
```

>    * - All resources created for this SPIRE - Envoy with OPA integration tutorial.
>    * - All resources created for the SPIRE - Envoy X.509 integration tutorial.
>    * - All deployments and configurations for the SPIRE agent, SPIRE server, and namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * All resources created for this SPIRE - Envoy with OPA integration tutorial.
   * All resources created for the SPIRE - Envoy X.509 integration tutorial.
   * All deployments and configurations for the SPIRE Agent, SPIRE Server, and namespace.
```

The `query` key defines the name of the policy to query. The next section focuses on details of the `envoy.authz.allow` policy specified for the `query` key.

## OPA Policy

OPA policies are expressed in a high-level declarative language called Rego. For this tutorial we created a sample rule named `allow` that includes three expressions. All the expressions must evaluate to true for the rule to be true.

```console
default allow = false

allow {
   valid_path
   http_request.method == "GET"
   svc_spiffe_id == "spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend"
}
```

Let's take a look at each expression individually. `valid_path` is a user-defined function created to ensure that only requests sent to permitted resources are allowed.

```console
import input.attributes.request.http as http_request

valid_path {
   glob.match("/balances/*", [], http_request.path)
}

valid_path {
   glob.match("/profiles/*", [], http_request.path)
}

valid_path {
   glob.match("/transactions/*", [], http_request.path)
}
```

> The function `valid_path` makes use of the built-in function `glob.match(pattern, delimiters, match)` the output of which is true if _match_ can be found in _pattern_ which is separated by _delimiters_. Then, to express logical OR in Rego you define multiple rules with the same name. That is why there are three definitions of `valid_path`, one per valid resource. 

Reviewer: Let's make the parameters for glob.match italic to indicate they're not literal values:

```suggestion
The function `valid_path` makes use of the built-in function `glob.match(`_pattern_` ,`_delimiters_`, `_match_`)` the output of which is true if _match_ can be found in _pattern_ which is separated by _delimiters_. Then, to express logical OR in Rego you define multiple rules with the same name. That is why there are three definitions of `valid_path`, one per valid resource. 
```

> The function `valid_path` makes use of the built-in function `glob.match(`_pattern_`, `_delimiters_`, `_match_`)` the output of which is true if _match_ can be found in _pattern_ which is separated by _delimiters_. Then, to express logical OR in Rego you define multiple rules with the same name. That is why there are three definitions of `valid_path`, one per valid resource.

Reviewer: The commas in monospace look funny because they are gray.

```suggestion
The function `valid_path` makes use of the built-in function `glob.match(`_pattern, delimiters, match_`)` the output of which is true if _match_ can be found in _pattern_ which is separated by _delimiters_. Then, to express logical OR in Rego you define multiple rules with the same name. That is why there are three definitions of `valid_path`, one per valid resource.
```

The following expression defines that the HTTP method of the request must be equal to `GET`:

```console
http_request.method == "GET"
```

And the last expression corresponds also to a user-defined function:

```console
svc_spiffe_id == "spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend"
```

The function `svc_spiffe_id` extracts the SPIFFE ID of the service from the `x-forwarded-client-cert` (XFCC) header in the request. The XFCC header is a proxy header which indicates certificate information for some or all of the clients or proxies that a request has passed through. The `svc_spiffe_id` function leverages two Envoy settings from `envoy.yaml` that modify the HTTP header:

```console
forward_client_cert_details: sanitize_set
set_current_client_cert_details:
   uri: true
```

When a client connection is mTLS, like this scenario, `forward_client_cert_details: sanitize_set` resets the XFCC header with the client certificate information and `set_current_client_cert_details` specifies the fields in the client certificate to be forwarded.

> The XFCC header value is a comma (“,”) separated string. Each substring is an XFCC element and each XFCC element is a semicolon “;” separated string. Each substring is a key-value pair, grouped together by an equals (“=”) sign. The following keys are supported by Envoy:

Reviewer: Missing () pair:

```suggestion
The XFCC header value is a comma (“,”) separated string. Each substring is an XFCC element and each XFCC element is a semicolon (“;”) separated string. Each substring is a key-value pair, grouped together by an equals (“=”) sign. The following keys are supported by Envoy:
```

   - `By`        The Subject Alternative Name (URI type) of the current proxy’s certificate.
   - `Hash`      The SHA 256 digest of the current client certificate.
   - `Cert`      The entire client certificate in URL encoded PEM format.
   - `Subject`   The Subject field of the current client certificate. The value is always double-quoted.
   - `URI`       The URI type Subject Alternative Name field of the current client certificate.
   - `DNS`       The DNS type Subject Alternative Name field of the current client certificate. A client certificate may contain multiple DNS type Subject Alternative Names, each will be a separate key-value pair.

> The following is a sample XFCC header value split into two lines for readability:
> 
> ```
> By=spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/backend;Hash=a9317919875e178ce6d61eaa023490
> a2091299753ca5cd01d5323e40696d690b;URI=spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend

Reviewer: I'm sorry for iterating on this, but I think putting the literal header name (x-forwarded-client-cert:) helps a little more. I also rebalanced the lines and refrased the introductory sentence.

```suggestion
The following is an XFCC header with a sample value that is split into two lines for readability:

\`\`\`
x-forwarded-client-cert: By=spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/backend;Hash=a9317919875e178ce6d6
1eaa023490a2091299753ca5cd01d5323e40696d690b;URI=spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend
\`\`\`
```

Author: I do agree with this. It shows a complete example of the header. Looks better. Thanks

In the `x-forwarded-client-cert` header, `Hash` is always set, and `By` is always set when the client certificate presents the URI type Subject Alternative Name value which is true when using X.509 SVIDs. Then `set_current_client_cert_details: uri: true` ensures that the URI type Subject Alternative Name (SAN) field is forwarded.

> With these details about the XFCC header in mind and knowing that a X.509 SVID MUST contain exactly one URI SAN and that the SPIFFE ID is set as a URI type in the SAN extension, then it is possible to extract the SPIFFE ID from the XFCC header set by Envoy using the function:

Reviewer: The all-caps MUST kind of gets lost next to SVID. So let's do bold:

```suggestion
With these details about the XFCC header in mind and knowing that a X.509 SVID **must** contain exactly one URI SAN and that the SPIFFE ID is set as a URI type in the SAN extension, then it is possible to extract the SPIFFE ID from the XFCC header set by Envoy using the function:
```

```console
svc_spiffe_id = spiffe_id {
   [_, _, uri_type_san] := split(http_request.headers["x-forwarded-client-cert"], ";")
   [_, spiffe_id] := split(uri_type_san, "=")
}
```

> Consequently, the policy will evaluate to true only when the request is sent to a valid resource (/balances/, /profiles/ or /transactions/) with a `GET` method and it comes from a workload authenticated with the SPIFFE ID equal to `spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend`. In all other cases, the request is not authorized by OPA and so is rejected by Envoy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consequently, the policy will evaluate to true only when the request is sent to a valid resource (/balances/, /profiles/ or /transactions/) with a `GET` method and the request comes from a workload authenticated with the SPIFFE ID equal to `spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend`. In all other cases, the request is not authorized by OPA and so is rejected by Envoy.
```

Consequently, the policy will evaluate to true only when the request is sent to a valid resource (/balances/, /profiles/ or /transactions/) with a `GET` method and the request comes from a workload authenticated with the SPIFFE ID equal to `spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend`. In all other cases, the request is not authorized by OPA and so is rejected by Envoy.

## Add an External Authorization Filter

> Finally, this setup requires an External Authorization Filter that connects to the OPA instance. This new HTTP Filter is used with OPA as an authorization service to enforce security policies over API requests received by Envoy. This is accomplish by adding a new HTTP filter in `envoy.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, this setup requires an External Authorization Filter that connects to the OPA instance. This new HTTP Filter is used with OPA as an authorization service to enforce security policies over API requests received by Envoy. This is accomplished by adding a new HTTP filter in `envoy.yaml`:
```

$ kubectl apply -k k8s/.

configmap/backend-envoy configured
configmap/backend-opa-policy-config configured
deployment.apps/backend configured
```

Next, the `backend` pod needs to be restarted to pick up the new configurations:

```console
$ kubectl scale deployment backend --replicas=0
$ kubectl scale deployment backend --replicas=1
```

# Part 2: Test connections

Now that services are deployed and also registered in SPIRE, let's test the authorization that we've configured.

## Testing Valid Requests

The first test will demonstrate how a request that satisfies the policy allows for the display of associated data. To run this test, we need to find the IP address and port that make up the URL to use for accessing the data.

```console
$ kubectl get services

NAME            TYPE           CLUSTER-IP    EXTERNAL-IP      PORT(S)          AGE
backend-envoy   ClusterIP      None          <none>           9001/TCP         6m53s
frontend        LoadBalancer   10.8.14.117   35.222.164.221   3000:32586/TCP   6m52s
frontend-2      LoadBalancer   10.8.7.57     35.222.190.182   3002:32056/TCP   6m53s
kubernetes      ClusterIP      10.8.0.1      <none>           443/TCP          59m
```

> The `frontend` service will be available at the `EXTERNAL-IP` value and port `3000`, which was configured for our container. In the sample output shown above, the URL to navigate is `http://35.222.164.221:3000`. Open your browser and navigate to the IP address shown for `frontend` in your environment, adding the port `:3000`. Once the page is loaded, you'll see the account details for user _Jacob Marley_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `frontend` service will be available at the `EXTERNAL-IP` value and port `3000`, which was configured for our container. In the sample output shown above, the URL to navigate to is `http://35.222.164.221:3000`. Open your browser and navigate to the IP address shown for `frontend` in your environment, adding the port `:3000`. Once the page is loaded, you'll see the account details for user _Jacob Marley_. 
```

[frontend-2-view-no-details]: images/frontend-2_view_no_details.png "Frontend-2 view no details account"

After trying to display the `frontend-2` data, you can verify the decision made by OPA using the same `scripts/backend-opa-logs.sh` script as performed in the previous section. A similar log entry is available for the `frontend-2` service but with the result equal to `false` due to the SPIFFE ID mismatch.

## Retesting frontend-2 with a New Policy

Let's update the Rego policy to match the SPIFFE ID of the `frontend-2` and test again. There is a Bash script that we can leverage to complete this task. Once executed, it will open the editor defined by your `KUBE_EDITOR`, or `EDITOR` environment variables, or fall back to `vi` for Linux or Notepad for Windows.

```console
$ bash scripts/backend-update-policy.sh
```

With the editor open, look for the following line that specifies the SPIFFE ID:

```console
svc_spiffe_id == "spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend"
```

Update that line to match the SPIFFE ID for the `frontend-2` workload:

```console
svc_spiffe_id == "spiffe://example.org/ns/default/sa/default/frontend-2"
```

> Save the changes and exit. The `backend-update-policy.sh` script resumes. The script applies the new version of the ConfigMap and then restarts the `backend` pod to pickup the new rule.

Reviewer: "Pick up" is the verb. "Pickup" is a truck or a sexy meeting with a stranger. But many English speakers don't know this rule either.

```suggestion
Save the changes and exit. The `backend-update-policy.sh` script resumes. The script applies the new version of the ConfigMap and then restarts the `backend` pod to pick up the new rule.
```

Author: This is a good catch :100:

Wait some seconds for the deployment to propagate before trying to view the `frontend-2` service in your browser again.
Once the pod is ready, refresh the browser using the correct URL for the `frontend-2` service (e.g. `http://35.222.190.182:3002`). As a result, now the page shows the account details for user _Alex Fergus_.

![Frontend-2][frontend-2-view]

[frontend-2-view]: images/frontend-2_view.png "Frontend-2 view"

On the other hand, if you now connect to the URL for the `frontend` service (e.g. `http://35.222.164.221:3000`), the browser only displays the title without any account details. This is expected because the policy was updated and now the SPIFFE ID for the `frontend` service does not satisfy the policy anymore.

# Cleanup

When you are finished, you can use the following commands to clean the environment created for the tutorial. It will remove:

>    * All resources created for this SPIRE - Envoy with OPA integration tutorial.
>    * All resources created for the SPIRE - Envoy X.509 integration tutorial.
>    * All deployments and configurations for the SPIRE Agent, SPIRE Server, and namespace.

Reviewer: Please remove the bullets at the end of these lines since they aren't full sentences.

```suggestion
   * All resources created for this SPIRE - Envoy with OPA integration tutorial
   * All resources created for the SPIRE - Envoy X.509 integration tutorial
   * All deployments and configurations for the SPIRE Agent, SPIRE Server, and namespace
```

Author: Ups, I fixed this for others tutorials and I forgot to do it here too. Thanks.
